Roughly 70,000 years ago, there were only a few thousand people left on planet earth. This was a time of avoiding extinction for sapiens. Back then, problems on people's minds were related to survival. These probably occupied a lot of mental bandwidth. Other than that, there wasn’t much time to innovate.

To sum up history of the first 500,000 years of humans: first we had a long period of 486,000 years with almost no innovation. Then, we had a shorter period of 14,000 years with a lot of innovation. The earlier period was about 35 times as long as the latter, but nearly no innovation happened. To people alive during the first period, the world was about sameness. From their perspective, culture didn’t change at all because no innovations were made during their lifetimes. This must have been more or less fine with them because they were not expecting innovation to improve their lives or solve their problems. But lack of innovation put us in a tough situation when our circumstances changed, which they inevitably do. For instance, with the arrival of an ice age that triggered the near-extinction event mentioned above.

Luckily this is not how things are today. Change in how we do things and why we do them - Innovation - happens all the time. Furthermore, information about what is going on in the world spreads easily, so people know that new things are happening and that society is changing, and are awaiting this change and wondering when it is coming. Overall, the pace of innvation is moving in the right direction, towards an increasing pace, albeit with some hiccups along the way. We as a society have set ourselves up in a way that is fruitful for innovation.

**The time it takes for an innovation to change society is decreasing overall.

But one should not confuse this trend - that innovation tends to happen faster in our society over time - with the misconception that new innovations will necessarily reach the market faster than those before them. Sometimes, society will experience progress very fast after which it might slow down for a while, only to speed up again. But overall, progress is quickening due to it being a higher societal priority combined with the pace of information spread and collaboration. Nevertheless, innovation is lumpy. The reason for this is very simple:

**The time it takes for an innovation to change society depends on the particulars of that innovation.**

There are many factors at play that determine the time this takes, such as how easy it is to roll out a particular product, regulatory barriers in that market, or how immediate the experienced value of the innovation is. For instance, pure software companies can distribute their technology quickly because there are no physical problems that need to be solved for them to do that. They just push the code. Often there aren’t any regulatory barriers either.

After the years of swift innovation that the internet has given, one can easily forget that innovation often takes time. Decades. All of the innovations that happened at the beginning of the 20th century took time. It took the phone, the car and electricity 30-40 years to go from 1 million users in the US to mainstream technology with, say, more than 50 million users. Since the beginning of the 21st century, much of innovation has been centered around the internet, an innovation that also took roughly 30 years from its inception to becoming mainstream technology. The innovation that we have experienced in the 21st century has mostly been applications of a genuinely new technology, the internet, manifesting itself as user applications. The internet has been a technology with an enormous source of innovation, and lately the innovation in that source has rippled through society.

I believe that the arrow of innovation is still pointing relentlessly towards faster innovation in the large scheme of things. Just look around you. There are now venture-capital firms willing to take risk on new ideas. People choose to pursue entrepreneurship without social stigma. Furthermore, entrepreneurs know it is OK to fail; it won’t ruin their entire lives or their personal economy. Governments often have programs in place to help them. Information is spreading faster than ever.

I also believe that there is amazing innovation left for us to be made. The innovation that we can and will make in the future will in hindsight make what we have today look like a minuscule and non-impressive stepping stone towards something much, much greater.

Over the last few years, we haven’t seen as much innovation reach society as we have been experiencing between 2005 and 2015 or so. This is not because all good innovations are already made (they never are), nor that the overall pace of innovation has slowed. So the question arises: Why are the particular technologies that are currently being developed taking such time? What are some particulars of a new technology that makes it catch on fast or take time? As mentioned, it depends on the particulars of the innovations. That is the topic of this chapter. 
