# Drag You in and Make You Stay

I remember one thing that my music teacher told me early in life: great music has multiple layers. On the one hand, it has the quality of immediate attraction: Listen to it once, and you like it - it drags you in. This is the first layer. But then, once you are in, it makes you stay with it. You can listen to it over and over and find new things - probably other things than those that dragged you in at first. Great music drags you in. Then it makes you stay. There is immediate attraction as well as depth - multiple layers to discover over time.

He was talking about music, but I believe that this is true for all art. A good book should be so enticing that you want to finish it and then read it again. It shouldn’t feel burdensome to get through it the first time. The next time you read it, there are hopefully new things to discover that make you enjoy it even more, which makes you re-read it.

After the social-media successes at the beginning of the 21st century such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and what have you, many founders were building competing social networks. Social network are interesting because they have no value when no people are on it. It lacks immediate attraction, but it has depth, in the sense that if everyone were magically using it, it would be very useful since everyone is there. But since everyone is already on Facebook, it has already achieved this depth, so no one is going to leave. So how can a social network drag you in?

The adage of the times became that to compete with a social network, there has to be something else that provides value to users that is not dependent on network effects. Figure out a subset of people with something in common. It could be a hobby, an interest or a sport. Then, build something tailor-made for that group. The recipe became to build features solving a particular need for people that could was there without the network effects. It might be a better booking system, a better way to showcase something, or a way to get some information that you want for your particular interest. This is giving people a reason to come, dragging them in. Once people are there, they stay for the network effects. Use the single-player game to make people come. Use the multi-player game to make people stay.

For social networks, this mostly turned out not to work. I believe that this is because a social network tends to not be as useful when confined to one particular part of your life, such as a hobby. It is convenient for people to have one network where they can communicate with all or most people that they want to communicate with, so there is gravitation back to that, making you stay. People are often willing to give up tailor-made features for this and haphazardly fill all of their feature needs with Facebook instead.

But the startups did get one thing right. They had the drag-you-in. But they didn’t have the make-you-stay. Facebook had that. It can be useful to think about these two parts separately because they are often different. People come for one thing, but stay for something different. 

When cars first came, rich people bought them as toys. There weren’t any roads for cars nor were there any gas stations, so utility as a means of transportation was limited. But the people who first bought cars didn’t care about that. They bought them anyway because they were fast and fun. Over time, a network was built, which made cars more useful. Gradually, it made sense for more people to buy a car since it had high utility, and the price point dropped because of economies of scale. The car went from fun to useful.

The car had a killer app: being a fun toy. Without that, the pace of innovation would probably have been much slower than it was. Since it was also very useful in the long run, when the network was put in place, the car as a technology was sticky. Without that, it might have turned out to just be a fad. A fun toy that eventually went out of fashion.

There are many technologies that have tremendous potential, but we are not going to get there without the killer app. We don’t magically jump from one point to another. Although there is a global maximum somewhere, we need to get there and that process can be just as hard as creating a technology with huge potential.