Linear algebra is a beautiful innovation. That is not only because the math has many useful applications today, image processing and machine learning among many others. It also had a beautiful way of coming about. It is a great example of an idea that, when it came, no one had an idea of what to do with. But then it went on to change everything. Linear algebra was once regarded as a quirky part of mathematics, without much usefulness. Today, it is probably part of the standard curriculum for any engineering education. That process took more than 50 years. The main driver behind that was the advent of computers, which make computations on the large matrices that linear algebra is about, feasible. But the mathematicians who invented linear algebra didn’t know about computers, because they didn’t exist at the time.

Any innovation that makes its way into the hands of users consists of many ideas stacked on top of each other. This is the innovation stack. At the absolute lowest level in the stack is usually physics, like fiber optic cable technology that runs the internet, or the physics of the internal combustion engine that runs a car. The time-to-market here can be quite long. It can take new physics or mathematics decades or centuries before it reaches people in some useful way. When the inventors are working on it, it is often not clear what exactly we will do with it.

Every new technology in the stack has to be brought forward throughout it. Subsequent innovation above it in the stack needs to happen to pass that value closer to the user. That takes time. Each step upwards in the stack is another step. Thus innovation that happens closer to the consumer brings value to them faster. With most new technologies, the higher levels in the innovation stack don’t even exist until very late in the process. It is not clear how the value that a technology has the potential to bring will actually look when it finally reaches users.

> **The higher up a new technology is in the innovation stack, the faster the time to market.**

Startups usually begin high up in the stack, i.e. close to the user, because that is where the pace of innovation is the highest. Ideally, they begin with a market opportunity or a customer problem in mind and work their way down the stack from that, only innovating further down as necessary. The opportunities to quickly build highly successful companies are typically high up in the stack. A startup leverages all the innovation that has been done up to that point. The value is mainly about packaging that innovation and bringing it to market. This part alone is often a complicated but immensely valuable achievement.

When the full stack is established, things are different. Then, innovation far down in the stack can reach the market quickly. One example of this is computer hardware improvement, which happen far down in the stack but reaches consumers quickly, because the innovation stack is highly established and standardized. Thus, innovation propagates through it quickly. But again, it is not always like that. Apple, for instance, has been innovating with novel computer chip hardware architecture, which means that software has to be rebuilt to fully utilize the new architecture. That, in its turn, means that there is a delay before customers actually notice this innovation that has happened further down in the stack. On the other hand, when Apple makes changes to its operating software, users often notice those immediately. They push them and they are in the hands of users. In a sense, the operating system is at the top of the stack because that is what consumers use directly and so innovation brings value. But in a sense it is not, since there are applications that run on top of the operating system. Some of the operating system innovation must also be utilized in the apps that run on top of it. That is why Apples want to, and indeed they do, encourage and sometimes force app developers to use their newest operating system features.

So the innovation that happens higher up in a stack, or in an already established stack, is the only kind of innovation that has a shot at being commercially viable. Here, you have an idea of how the innovation will look when it is in use. But the innovation that happens far down in the stack is the kind that really has the potential to change everything in the long run, even though it is impossible to see how that is going to happen.

Usually, entrepreneurs do a pretty good job at things they are in full control of. Things like product development or cost control. Even though they require a lot of problem-solving and are not easy problems, they are solvable problems, and entrepreneurs usually manage to solve these problems. On other hand, the hardest parts are almost always those that involve other people. More precisely, getting people who don't care about a startup to care. This takes a lot of work. Besides, you cannot know how long it is going to take. Parts that involve this are sales, fundraising and hiring. Not coincidentally, these are the parts where most startups fail.

When fundraising, you need to convince a venture-capital firm, which probably gets thousands of cases per year while making only a handful of investments, to invest in you. That is hard. When selling, you might have to convince someone who has a lot on their plate already, a secure job where they have no interest whatsoever in taking risks, to take a leap of faith in your unknown company. And when hiring, you need to convince the smartest people that you are going to change the world and for them to change their lives and quit a high-paying job to join you. Those are pretty tough challenges. And they are enough to keep a founder occupied. And as it happens, they are all challenges that are inherent to operating at the top level of the innovation stack, the only place where building a company is commercially viable. Packaging existing technology and bringing it to market is hard, and deserves a lot more credit than it gets.