The one trait that separates entrepreneurs from the rest of the population is belief. Some people, like myself, hold a strong belief only in the idea that very few, if any, of the interesting things in life are actually understood, taking every idea in the disorderly domain that constitutes most of life with a grain of salt. Being confident in an idea, on the other hand, means that you might execute on it.

We can think of a person who builds houses. Not a builder by trade, not by expertise, only by dedication. The only separator is confidence (nicely paired with a certain degree of stubbornness). The house will get built. It won't be perfect, it won't be on schedule, but built it will be. And over time, it will evolve into a decent-looking house.

With startups, there is little value in professionalization. To a large extent, this amateur builder is all we got. Because while there is a certain timelessness to the art of building houses, there is very little timelessness to the art of building startups. As Peter Thiel says, every moment in business happens only once.

Some companies are building products on top of debunked social science. For instance, a company that embodies through a product some idea that humans prefer this or that, because that is what the social science of the day proclaims. I can think of a dating app or a job platform based on social science that improves matching through some simplistic categorization of humans. The truth might be that the science doesn't generate results better than noise. But still, the app gets built. It attracts customers who share a belief in the same false idea. In the meantime, bystanders (perhaps investors that choose not to invest) who don't understand how companies get built proclaim that the company will fail because the underlying science is flawed. But it becomes a descent business. Gradually, as this science doesn't produce any significant results in the real world support might fade. But by then, the company has shifted to be based on some other science, or something entirely different altogether. So it was not the quality of the idea that mattered, it was that something was being built.
