I believe it is important, when we talk about Web3 and the benefits that decentralization has the potential to bring, to remember that all of this lies on top of the internet, which in many ways is a centralized system. Yes, the protocols are open to everyone, but the organizations that run the particular instance of the internet that we are using aren't. Organizations like ICANN and Google. These organizations decide (or at least have the right to decide) both who gets to hook up to the network, as well as what information gets to be transferred through it. We need only note that there are a few cables, about 10, that cross the Atlantic Ocean that make the internet work, between two continents. Those are owned and controlled by organizations. That is centralization.

Nevertheless, It does make sense to build a decentralized system on top of a centralized system. Decentralization is a desired property in a system, at any layer. It is less bad to have only one organization that has an on-off switch to a system than to have two separate organizations that each have an on-off switch. Currently, there is centralization of power to those who run the internet, as well as to those who run the databases built into the internet applications that are used on top of it. Web3 will to a large extent weaken the power of one of those, the internet applications, which is a good thing for users, even though it won't remove the centralization on the internet entirely, at least not for now.

This kind of dynamic is kind of what we see with Apple's app store. The app store is centralized, but there is decentralization in the sense that there are a lot of different apps by many different suppliers. The decentralized nature of the app store does still provide the value to users that decentralization brings - through increased alternatives and redundancy.

In the future, I think it's possible that the internet too will be decentralized. This is the kind of global, decentralized collaboration that Web3 can make possible. Already, some initiatives allow people to run their own infrastructure that contributes to a more decentralized internet. This is only decentralization at the "edge" of the internet, and these initiatives won't solve everything, but it's an important start and inspiration. I would love to see more of this - that anyone can run a hotspot, a transatlantic cable, or a satellite, to contribute to a decentralized internet. But other parts of the internet, like the databases governing who owns what domain, for instance, need to get decentralized too, for us to reach a fully decentralized internet. I hope it happens.
