This is not a particularly efficient way to run a social system. It requires many people to maintain identical copies of information. But what we lose in efficiency we gain in robustness. The system is robust because there are no central units that it is highly dependent on (i.e. multiple identical copies). Any single person could disappear from it and it would still work. Therefore the system is unlikely to collapse entirely. There can be mistakes, but those are small mistakes. In a more centralized system, risks are systemic. They happen more rarely but can lead to a complete collapse.

Centralization, important events or objects concentrated to a single part of a system, has the disadvantage that when it collapses, the system goes down with it. Yet we are constantly enticed to centralization. It is cheaper, for instance. Out of robustness and efficiency, efficiency is the visible one. Robustness is invisible - one is continuously paying for something that will never happen. As when paying the mafia for protection, it is only when you stop paying that the value is evident. Politicians love doing visible things, and they hate paying for invisible things.

We return to the pen-and-paper decentralized economy. Will people stop maintaining their own ledger because the system works regardless of the actions of that single individual? Would such a society move from millions of bookkeepers to hundreds, to only a few, after which it has become centralized and runs the risk of collapse? Over time the system gets more prone to failure - more efficient but less robust, harming the system. It is not hard to see that this effect will play out, but it is still hard to prevent, and this effect is common.

We can often think of a better way to do things but that isn't where the challenge lies. A lot of good things are not achieved because they are either hard to adopt or once adopted, easy to deviate from. The last bit is known as the Tragedy of the Commons, which would be one reason for the early death of the pen-and-paper economy.

I can think of three ways to mitigate a slow death of the pen-and-paper economy. The first one is forcing people to run it. This not-very-creative yet trendy solution is the one most commonly used to solve the Tragedy of the Commons. To get around the problem that people might do something good for them but bad for everyone else, some sort of institution is created to make sure that people behave. One of the main roles of institutions is to make sure that people do things that are good for society, while it would be in any individual's short-term interest to do something else. In other words, preventing the tragedy of the commons. But there is a problem with this: if people are forced, the function that forces people is now a critical part of the system. If that part of the system collapses, the entire system collapses. Since what we are discussing here is how to stabilize a decentralized system, it is not a solution unless there is a decentralized way of doing it. There is no good way that I know of to force people's behavior without invoking elements that are centralized in some way. The idea fails.

The second way to ensure that people continue to maintain the pen-and-paper economy is by ingraining behavior culturally or biologically. As previously mentioned, the establishment of social hierarchies is an example of such a behavior that happens naturally. Just like people naturally form social hierarchies in a culture, why can't they naturally form the habit of everyone maintaining a pen-and-paper ledger? I think this is perhaps theoretically possible, but it is not the solution that we are looking for. Besides, biologically-encoded knowledge is prone to local optimization, which we are discussing how to avoid. Evolution operates based on single genes and if there are no local incentives to maintain the ledger, it would fail globally. Besides, biological evolution takes millions of years and is very hard for us to control, which means that it is not a worthy alternative when it comes to changing society. We are patient, but we are not that patient.

The other side of this coin is cultural evolution. Cultural evolution has the advantage of occurring on a much more reasonable timescale, allowing us to not reject it immediately based on time. Emmanuel Kant proposed the following moral test known as the categorical imperative: If everyone did what I am doing, what would happen to society? Only behavior that works is permitted. Thou Shall Not Freeride. With this test, he morally placed the responsibility for the Tragedy of the Commons on every individual's shoulders. Clearly, people did not listen because if they did, the Tragedy of the Commons would not be an issue. I believe this test is problematic for other reasons, but we will get to that another time. For now, we might consider what would happen if Emmanuel Kant were a somewhat more practical person, an engineer. Engineers don't cook up moral guidelines, they build. And the engineer's version of the categorical imperative is not moral but practical: If everyone does what they want to do, what will happen to my system? How can a system be designed so that the user's behavior preserves or even improves the system as a whole? No need for laws, no need for limiting moral guidelines. Just good engineering.

This is the only way to avoid the Tragedy of the Commons, without building institutions or trying to change the behavior of people. We may not be able to change the people but we can change the landscape, the engineer proclaims. Good engineering can change the landscape to make good things easier and bad things harder.

We humans are efficient creatures. We are like flies, flying toward wherever the light is, even if that means death. Efficient creatures don't pay taxes unless they have to. And even in a society where there are no taxes to pay to a government, there are taxes to pay to nature. Those taxes are equivalent to paying the mafia for protection: you don't notice the effects of paying as long as you pay, but when you stop, you notice. There is a reason why 99% of all the species who have ever lived on planet earth are extinct: They weren't paying their taxes. Somebody has to make sure that we pay our taxes to nature. Rest assured, unlike the IRS, this tax man will exist forever. Nature always has taxes to collect. Because there are always events that we haven't seen yet, that are not in the data, that will harm us. And we need to prepare for them as much as we can. We need to be robust, not only efficient.

So how the heck are we going to make sure that we pay our taxes to nature?
