Database technology innovation happens all the time. Nearly always these innovations relate to properties that are already known and considered important: efficiency, redundancy, simplicity, and so forth. There are trade-offs between these properties, so various database technologies live on different points on the spectrum of trade-offs. There are also innovations that figure how to improve on one property without trading off as much of another property than what was the norm previously.

In its essence, blockchain is a novel database technology. It is a new kind of database because it can do things that no other database technology that we know of can do. More precisely (and this may sound strange but will soon be explained), it can store data that no other database can.

To see what only blockchain can do we need to introduce the concept of social data. Social data is what it sounds like, data that in some sense is social. More precisely, this is data that has value if and only if many people agree that the data is valid. Some examples are data about who owns what, who has which place in an hierarchy, who created what, or who gets to make which decision. In short, many important datasets that result from a society or collaboration between people. Normally, it is not hard for any person to build something that resembles this kind of this database. The hard part is getting a lot of people to believe in it, and it is then that it becomes useful.

> **Social data has value only if many people regard it as true.**

Contrast this with non-social data, which has value regardless of how many people consider it to be true. This can be data of a more objective nature, such as the results of a known computation or experiment. If someone wanted to, they could just rerun the calculation or the experiment and verify the data by generating it themselves. Anyone can download the database, detect an error, re-share the data, and other people could independently verify that change in the database. The notion of truth exists outside of the database. Another kind of non-social data is data that has value to one or a few people. This can be a record of one-to-one communication, for instance. If one person or an organization has a view of a truth that a database should describe, the data can be verified against that truth. If someone else changes the data, that person can detect that and correct it. But it is only true and useful to a small group of people and they are the only ones with read-write access.

Storing non-social data is easy. A few centuries ago it was hard, but after centuries of problem-solving we have figured out how to do it well. This is what all the database technology that we know of does. As long as it is possible to control write-acces, it is possible to store data. But other than blockchain, there is no technology to store social data. And that is the key: The databases that we have cannot store social data. When stored in a non-blockchain database, the data loses its property of being social and becomes non-social data. The only way to attempt to store social data is by converting it to non-social data and then storing it as non-social data is stored. That is done by taking one person's or organization's claim to be the version of the social database to be the database. That person or organization safeguards the data and updates it as they see fit.

So there is a property to some data, a "sociality" property, and this kind of data cannot be stored in any other database than a blockchain without it changing. To see the property, we need not only study the data itself, but also the world in which it lives. Nonetheless, it is a property of the data, and that property disappears if we store it in a non-blockchain database.

This is a way of viewing digital data that I don't think we have ever encountered before, which is why I believe that it takes some time for most people to wrap their heads around it. But we should remind ourselves that this kind of emergent property is ever-present for physical (non-digital) objects. Two real-world objects may be identical for all practical reasons when you observe the thing itself, but when one considers the society that the objects live in, you realize that one is an original and one is a replica. Thus, much more value is placed on the original. Storing the original requires state-of-the-art technology for security, or someone would steal it (a process, by the way, that may lead to people questioning its originality, thus leading to it losing that property). The objects are practically the same, but because of emergent properties, the value that society places on one of the objects, the objects are very different. And because of that, the objects have different storage needs.

Or think of a president just before and after that person has been elected president. It is the same person in terms of the atoms that the person consists of. But some real and important property has changed. The same person now has completely different and very real powers than before he or she was elected president.

There is no reason for why the same kind of property cannot be assigned to a digital database. We just haven't been able to store that kind of data before, because we haven't had the technology for it. And that sums up what a blockchain can do:

> **A blockchain is a technology for storing social data.**
