The web consists of applications that derive much of their usefulness from managing proprietary databases. Since many of these databases are social, there is no other way to manage them other than by having a safeguard (typically a company) doing so. The only way to store social data without first turning it into subjective or objective data is by using a blockchain.

Most web applications use a collection of different databases of various sizes and social value. Facebook, for instance, consists of a content database with feed content, all the images that users have uploaded, etc. This makes up most of Facebook's data. Although this data may be valuable to the person who created it, the social value of it actually isn't that high. The data has more of a subjective nature to it. That is because it is highly related to a single person. If a content creator wishes to switch from Facebook to something else, not owned by Meta, it would be fine to export his or her content and re-upload it (and change it as desired in the process). The technology to store this data exists and is in use today - no blockchain required.

Closely related to this content is the data with all the content interactions, such as likes, reshares and comments. Since much of social media on the internet is centered around user-created content, the interaction data around it becomes a record of history. The social value of this data is much greater than the content data itself. One can't just download and re-upload it, because in that process one could add likes and interactions that didn't actually occur. History records have great social value. As soon as events took place and become history, people are going to start disagreeing about what happened. Either one entity decides which version of history is valid, or it is decided through consensus.

The database with the greatest social value is the social graph. This governs who follows who. Having read-write privileges for this database is a great power and everyone cannot have those privileges at once, because the graph would descend into chaos and become unusable.

Note that when we think of these databases, it is not that much of a concern how the data is actually structured from a physical and computational perspective, but rather which types of data with various degrees of social value are part of making an application useful. The point is that any internet application consists of a collection of different kinds of data that it needs to work, with different properties. It would be beneficial to the user if some of that data was stored on the blockchain, because it eliminates the need for a safeguard. For non-social data, it doesn't make a difference. It would be computationally inefficient to store non-social on the blockchain.

The data with the highest social value is the data that should be stored on the blockchain. In a sense, that data goes from being part of a web application to being part of the internet. One would use an application to interact with the data, rather than having the application decide what the data should be.
