The internet as it runs today is very useful for information transfer. But it doesn't do much for information storage - at least not directly. Information is stored outside of the internet, in its nodes. You wish to access information, so you use the internet to ping another node in the network to get the information that you request.

The internet doesn’t come with a database built into it. It only comes with information transfer. When you are using the internet, you are querying a database that lies at another end of the network and information is sent over the internet. It is completely up to the node that runs the database to decide how to respond to that query. If the node disappears, the data disappears.

But instead of having one copy of a database on the web in one node, you can have many versions in many nodes. Query one of those nodes, and you get the same data. The internet is still doing information transfer rather than information storage. But now there are multiple nodes that you can turn to to get that information. There is less dependency on a single node.

When is this useful? For some data, you can just back it up yourself and that is the end of it - no need for this. Redundancy is not necessary on the internet when you can create the redundancy yourself. But some databases contain data that in some sense is social. This is data that has value precisely because that is what everyone agrees is the data. Data about who owns what. Who has which place in an hierarchy. Who created what. Who gets to make which decision. What is true. You cannot just download this data and change it. This is data that has value precisely because there is one version of the database. As soon as you download the data and start changing it, the data loses its social value.

The blockchain plays an important part in this because the technology enables collaboration between the nodes. If there are 1,000 copies of a database, how do we know that 999 of them are not run by a single organization? And if an organization wishes to change the database, what stops them from setting up 2,000 databases of their own, suddenly changing the truth? That is where blockchain technology comes into the picture.

The technology achieves several things. It takes away power from each single node and creates redundancy. No single node can decide how to respond to a query, because there are multiple versions of it. At the same time, it ensures that all of the databases respond in the same way - are in consensus. It also ensures that the database cannot be overridden by someone who wishes to change it, for instance, by a malevolent actor creating many new instances of it. Most importantly, all of this is achieved in a decentralized way, that is, not simply by creating a centralized entity that keeps track of it all - the whole system is decentralized.

That is what Web3 is about. Using the internet to co-run a database. Achieving consensus about social truths, without depending on a single actor.
