If the grocery store is giving out free food samples, one might take two or three, but it is hard to take a million samples. Often, there is no explicit rule that governs this, but still it doesn't happen. This inefficiency can exist in the real world without being exploited because of social and physical barriers. On the internet, taking one million free samples is no problem. Just set up a simple loop that continues to take samples as long as they are available. Do that behind a VPN tunnel so that the store doesn't even notice that it's the same person.

When things move from the non-internet world to the internet world, it changes in unforeseen ways. An example: Some countries with free healthcare have problems incorporating the internet in the consumer-facing parts of the healthcare system. If healthcare is free, i.e. the user doesn't pay the healthcare provider for a visit, the only real cost (broadly defined as the limited resources spent, time and effort included) related to visiting lies in the process of visiting, such as the time spent going to the hospital. Before the internet, that process was sufficiently burdensome to discourage people from overusing a free system. The cost (narrowly defined as the money that changes hands) is the same, but even if no payment is required to visit a doctor, spending half a day at a hospital is not an enjoyable experience. When the doctor is accessible digitally that cost disappears or declines, which means that more people are going to visit the doctor because the real cost has declined.

When the real cost of getting healthcare declines more people are going to use it. On the supply side, there might be a slight increase in resource utilization because of efficiencies from using the internet. If the healthcare provider is paid on a per-visit basis, a sudden drain of government cash could follow. Some people in the healthcare system quickly become wealthy because they make increased profits on the same resources by utilizing them more efficiently. But that is probably a short-term effect, because the government is the sole customer for healthcare services in this particular system and should thus be able to renegotiate the rates to account for this.

But there is still a limit to how much healthcare resources exist, so there has to be someone or something that decides who gets it. The process of selection would move somewhere else, probably with queues online instead that would turn out to be much longer, because of the lower cost of waiting.

Then we have mail. In the non-internet world, any person is free to visit any mailbox and deliver mail to it. No need to pay anyone. That part is similar to the internet world, where sending an e-mail is free. There is no cost (narrowly defined) preventing people from sending emails, either in the internet or the non-internet world. The physics of the non-internet world is what prevents annoying people from doing annoying things at scale. In the non-internet world, you can spam one mailbox or a dozen, but you cannot easily spam a million. You would have to go there or convince someone else to do it.

These examples illustrate that processes that are costly in some way might be of benefit to an economic system as a whole. True, there may be a way of replacing costs like these with other processes where resources are not simply wasted. But that is not an easy problem that is going to solve itself. For instance, some would say that both problems above are solvable by raising prices for the user. However, that has changed the fundamental properties of the system, and some would say that it has become more unfair in the process.

We can connect the dots with cryptocurrency. People talk about the energy that cryptocurrencies waste and some outright ban it for wasting energy. Crypto is not a waste of energy as long as the system wouldn't function without that energy expense. As long as we know of no other to way run the system, it does not constitute a waste. Basically, crypto is bottled effort. You have it right there in the expression proof-of-work. It is a way to prove that you have done work, which can be incorporated into processes on the internet without a middle-man. It is the online equivalent of the drive to the doctor's office. When there needs to be some work - it could just be a tiny, tiny amount - things are more like a world that humans are used to. That means that you can easily visit a website or send an email once, twice or even thirty times - but not a million times. The waste of energy is useful when it allows the system to work.
