Many people read books in a way that I find to be very ineffective. They start reading lots of books, finish all of them, and read them at a steady pace. However, when it comes to non-fiction, the key is to realize that most books are not good. Thus it only makes sense to spend a lot of time with the few books that are good. The reason that most books are not good is that writing one is hard. It has to drag you in, so it has to be well-written. This is the easy part, yet many books fail even at this stage. More importantly, a good book contains deep knowledge. It has a significant shot at changing your life or your outlook on the world in a significant way. That should stretch into different areas of your life, areas that you perhaps didn't anticipate at first. This is what deep knowledge is.

But people spend a lot of time with non-good books, which are all other non-fiction books. These books include but are not limited to books that to a large extent rely on data for their conclusion. A non-good book relies on data, a good book relies on ideas. This, by the way, is why I don't include any sources for this newsletter when I have examples from the real world. The examples don't matter. They are drawn from my memory. Some of the details could be incorrect. They are there to make things more concrete and the text more readable. But they could just as well have been made-up examples. It doesn't matter. It is the ideas that matter and they should stand by themselves. It is when it is the other way around that is a problem. Books that start with the data, for instance, one or several studies. Then the author starts speculating from there. It could turn out that those studies don’t replicate well, or have very limited reach outside the lab. Many books are in this category because people like to know how complicated things such as psychology, economy, and negotiation work. But at the current state of knowledge these things, I regret to inform you, are not knowable, so these books don't contain any deep knowledge.

It is an important caveat that non-good books need not be useless. They may provide some benefit to one's life. But that comes in other ways than from providing deep knowledge. A psychology book might not contain any deep knowledge, but it might still provide food for thought, make you believe that you know something, which might make you more confident. But those effects diminish over time, much more rapidly so than if the book contained deep knowledge. The effects of reading good books, on the other hand, can be enormous, and continue to be so over a long period of time. That is why I encourage people to try and read those.
