Some video games try to feel realistic. You have your skill-system, which admittedly might be somewhat more exciting than real-world skills, like alchemy and magic rather than computer programming and painting. But you might also have more realistic-feeling skills, like in the Sims, where you might have cooking or gardening. Besides the fact that you are in a fantasy-world rather than the real world and that might be exciting in itself, what is it that makes these skills more exciting to learn in a video-game rather than in the real world? One would think that it would be way more exciting to learn these things in the real world, because here, they actually accrue to you.

Here is how you learn new things in video-game world: You do things and you get better at them. In video-game world, you do something one hundred times and you level up. At the beginning, it might be 10 times, then it might be one hundred times to level up, and after a while it might be one thousand times. If you're playing on ultra-hard, it might take you much longer to make progress. But you are still going to make progress. The path between effort and reward is short. It might require patience, but it doesn't require perseverence.

This is how we would love things to be in the real world, but they are not like that. Even if you put in one hundred, one thousand or even ten thousand hours into one thing, there is no guarantee that you will reach a certain level. In the real world, progress comes in lumps. You are stuck on a plateau, putting in effort, and if you are lucky, you eventually take the step to the next plateau. But there are no guarantees. There is no progress bar in real life. It might turn out that you were doing the wrong thing and have to start over to make progress. That doesn't sound like a very fun video game. But real learning is exploring, and it is in the nature of exploring, that you never know what you are going to find. As Melville wrote: It is not down on any map; true places never are.

