When a fact or a theory is supported by science, people typically place a lot of weight on that or take it as something that should be believed. Listening to science is often proclaimed as a smart thing to do. This spans from everything from physics to psychology, to nutrition, to macroeconomics.

But all sciences are not the same. They are at various maturity and have different predictive power in the outside world. Macroeconomists, for instance, are often baffled, such as during the past few years of low interest rates, low inflation and low unemployment. This combination isn't one that the standard macroeconomic models allow for. At the same time, central bankers are trying to figure out what is going on so that they can steer the economy towards the two percent inflation rate that is considered healthy. At this task they fail miserably, using state-of-the-art macroeconomic models. Clearly, these are hard problems that they are tackling. With today's models, they aren't getting very far.

I'm not saying that it's not useful to learn about macroeconomics. I'm saying that today, if you want to predict the real world, macroeconomics won't have much to give. And I think that if people had a clearer view of the state of some sciences, a lot fewer students would pursue them. Students are encouraged to do things that they find interesting, and of course, these fields sound interesting! Who wouldn't want to know how the human brain works, how the perfect diet looks or how to steer the global economy. I would want to learn those things too. But no one, not even the most learned scientist, knows enough about how these things work to make predictions in the real world. So if one pursues these fields to be able to make predictions about the real world, one is unfortunately misinformed. 

The sole reason to go into an immature science is to understand its current state and work on improving it. In light of this, the student's choice of what to study might be different. Ask a student: Do you want to spend several years learning theories that have very little, if any, predictive power in the real world, so that you can work on figuring out how to replace or improve those theories? Do you want to learn theories that work or theories that don't work and fix them?

But the students who go into these sciences don't see that this is the choice that they are making. They believe that they are learning the answers to some of humanity's deepest questions, which we actually do not have. It shouldn't be a surprise that many of these university degrees have high post-graduation unemployment figures, if the students haven't continued within academia. Because, often, there isn't that much to offer to the world outside of it.
