A couple of years ago I had a discussion with a person about ticks. He hated ticks, as they carry diseases that can have nasty effects. His line of reasoning was that ticks can and should be extinguished, because they do us no good, while at the same they are not a significant food source for any other species, nor do they have any natural enemies. Basically, good for us to extinguish and not bad for the ecosystem, thus safely removable. I have no idea what the backing is of this idea in the scientific community, but I could sense that there was something wrong with this. At the time, however, I hadn't thought particularly deeply about why that is.

Biology and ecology belong are examples of disorderly systems. Most interesting things are wrapped in the fog of disorder. Thus, we have not fully figured out how they work. Every single non-humanmade phenomenon in the universe except for basic physics lies here. It is not for us to accurately predict what is going to happen here.

In a disorderly system, a small change in one variable can cause disproportionally large changes to another variable. Moreover, the relationships between the variables may change over time, making it hard to establish relationships between them. One can do a lot of irreversible damage to such a system.

Science has brought a lot of good things, but actually some bad things too. The good thing is that it has given us an indication that the world is understandable and that we shouldn't limit ourselves to believing that we know everything. That makes it a worthy path to pursue. The bad thing is that people want to do science on all kinds of phenomena, which is fine, but just because we do science, doesn't mean we know anything at all about where that science stands in terms of predictive power. This is where a lot of misconception lies, which can be destructive. For instance, there is a huge difference (enormous, gigantic, I cannot emphasize this enough) between biology and basic physics, in terms of our knowledge about what is going on in the real world. But just because we can shoot a rocket to Mars doesn't mean that we can safely extinguish the tick from planet earth.

The religious get one thing right: Most things in the world currently lie outside our realm of understanding. They are wrong in believing that the world is not understandable, but that is another story. The world may be understandable, but we don't understand it, and believing so is an awful error to make because you really find yourself playing god.

The right thing to do with a disorderly system is to gently poke at it and observe the effects. And preferably, try to do so in a reversible way. That is the only way we (currently) can understand the system. I believe that if ticks were removed, we would learn a lot about their actual ecological functions because things would start changing in ways we didn't predict. I believe that we would be surprised. But it is an irreversible action in a disorderly system and that is precisely what one should stay away from.
